--------------------------------------
User:


I'm going to provide transcripts. You're going to respond to each one with a cleaned up version of it as best you can produce. Sound good?
--------------------------------------
ChatGPT:


Sounds great! Feel free to share the first transcript, and I'll clean it up for you.
--------------------------------------
User:


in Cork former employees of Apple were
today fondly remembering the visits
there of Steve Jobs during the 1980s the
company's arrival in Cork in 1980 was
one of Ireland's earliest IT industry
inward investment stories do you
actually believe that every home is
within the short term the next few years
going to have its own personal computer
well we base our uh our theory on the
fact that we make personal computers
that can be used irrespective of
location and the home just happens to be
one of the locations that the computer
are used in so we foresee apples being
used in homes but we also foresee them
being used in businesses and education
and there's an Apple going up on the
first space shuttle as you may know to
control a Biology experiment and of
course Apple lasted longer than the
space shuttle Steve Jobs and apple seen
here arriving in Cork when the company
was on the verge of winning the race to
bring out the first personal computer
Dan burn started with a company in 1981
he met Mr jobs a number of times over
the following 13 years he was uh clearly
uh a genius and I think we'll go down in
the analy of history of one of the great
inventors and the great innovators um he
was a tough guy uh he was tough to work
for he was tough to work with he was
very demanding um but clearly a genius
at the massive Apple facility in Cork
City the American flag was flying at
half mast as a sign of respect for Mr
jobs many of the 2,000 plus Apple
employees here in Cork are engaged in
high-end strategic work developing and
bringing to life the vision Steve Jobs
had when he spoke about her world after
personal computers with cloud computing
and other exciting developments the
Steve Jobs Legacy will be felt for many
years to come you think he'll be missed
I have no doubt I mean not alone will
Apple miss him but the world in general
will miss him we'll all miss him Daman
TI in ARS
[Music]
cork
--------------------------------------
ChatGPT:


Here’s the cleaned-up version of your transcript:

In Cork, former employees of Apple fondly remembered Steve Jobs’ visits during the 1980s. Apple’s arrival in Cork in 1980 marked one of Ireland’s earliest IT industry inward investment success stories.

Reporter: "Do you actually believe that every home, in the short term—within the next few years—will have its own personal computer?"

Steve Jobs: "We base our theory on the fact that we make personal computers that can be used irrespective of location. The home just happens to be one of the locations where computers are used. So, we foresee Apples being used in homes, but also in businesses and education. There’s even an Apple computer going up on the first space shuttle to control a biology experiment."

And, of course, Apple’s legacy outlasted the space shuttle program.

Steve Jobs and Apple were seen arriving in Cork when the company was on the brink of releasing one of the first personal computers. Dan Byrne, who started with the company in 1981 and met Mr. Jobs several times over the next 13 years, shared his thoughts:

“He was clearly a genius and will go down in the annals of history as one of the great inventors and innovators. He was tough—a tough guy to work for and work with—very demanding. But clearly a genius.”

At Apple’s massive Cork facility, the American flag flew at half-mast as a sign of respect for Mr. Jobs. Many of the 2,000-plus Apple employees in Cork are engaged in high-end strategic work, bringing to life the vision Steve Jobs had for a world beyond personal computers, with cloud computing and other exciting developments.

Reporter: "Do you think he’ll be missed?"

Dan Byrne: "I have no doubt. Not only will Apple miss him, but the world in general will miss him. We’ll all miss him."

[Music plays as the segment concludes in Cork.]

Let me know if you’d like further refinements or a different tone!
--------------------------------------
User:


hi I must apologize to all for being
late I was driving here at 90
mph couldn't find a parking place and
like all the experiences you've been
through this
[Music]
morning had a uh photographer from
scientific americ that wanted to take
some pictures in the last few days
so we went over to a school we thought
they decided they wanted to take some
pictures of someone from Apple in a
educational setting using some computers
and we wandered over turns out there's a
little booklet that is put out in
copertino and there's about 20 different
schools with apples and we picked one
out that had six Apple computers and
wandered over there one afternoon and
this happened to be the afternoon at the
fourth and fifth graders were going to
be there once a week fourth and fifth
graders from this one school in sort of
an advanced learning program come over
and use the Apple computers and I had
the most delightful conver ation with
some four and
5-year-olds they they probably know as
much about the computer as I do maybe
more
and they're they're totally fluent in it
and they're very much at home in it and
they beat me in most of the games in it
and it was really quite an experience
because we we always talk about all
these things happening sort of at
intellectual verbal level but actually
got a chance to see 20 students
interacting with these computers on a
one-on-one basis and I I couldn't help
remembering my own school days when none
of these things existed and we just get
into trouble all the
time 11:30 at night last night a friend
of mine Bob medcap calls me up and uh
he's got three German friends visiting
from Germany and they want to buy 20 to
30 apples a month for some God awful who
knows what reason and they want him in
Germany and they want to talk about
buying him at 11:30 at night um
and you know a guy in Nebraska is using
an Apple computer to calculate soil
samples to know what kind of fertilizer
to put in the ground it just it's an
endless array of things that people are
doing with this watch your oh excuse me
the other
one we had absolutely no idea what
people were going to do these things
when we started out uh matter of fact
the two people it was designed for was
was and myself because we couldn't
afford to buy a computer kit on the
market so we liberated some parts from
hula Packard and
Atari and uh worked on a design for
about 6 months and decided that we would
uh build our own
computer so we built one and
uh was up till 400 in the morning for
many moons and we got it working we
showed some of our friends immediately
everybody wanted one and it turned out
that it took about 4 40 hours to build
one of these things and about another 20
30 40 to debug it and we had a lot of
friends that worked at similar companies
who could Liberate the parts also
and we found ourselves spending every
sare moment of our time helping our
friends to build computers and it was
just getting to be a a tremendous drain
on our on our lives so we got the idea
one day that that we could make a
printed circuit board uh without the
parts in it and sell these blank printed
circuit boards to our friends and
probably cut the assembly and debug time
down to you know 5 10 hours so w sold
his hp6 calculator and I sold my van and
we got 1,300 bucks together and we paid
our friend of ours who was this uh PC
board layout person 1,300 bucks to do us
a layout and decided we'd sell printed
circuit boards at twice what it cost to
build them and hopefully recoup our
calculator and transportation at some
later dat so that's what we did and I
was out trying to Pedal PC boards one
day and walked into a bite shop the
first bite shop in Mountain View and
uh Paul Terrell then owner of the bite
shop said uh he would like to take 50 of
these
computers and I saw dollar signs in
front of my
eyes and but he had one catch which was
that he wanted them fully assembled and
tested ready to go which is a new twist
so we spent the next 5 days on the phone
to Distributors and convinced the
electronics parts Distributors around
here to give us about $10,000 worth of
Parts on thin air just on enthusiasm so
we got the parts and we built 100
computers and we sold 50 of them for
cash in 29 days paid off off the
Distributors and that's how we got
started so we had 50 computers left over
well that meant we had to sell them so
then we started worrying about marketing
worrying about distribution got on the
phone to the other computer stores
around the country and gradually the
whole thing began to build momentum and
at that point in time we had some
feeling that we were on to something but
the the feeling was is is so different
than the experience of actually seeing
it happen right now it's entirely
different
and sometimes a lot a lot of people ask
well did you know it was going to
mushroom into this phenomenon and you
could say yeah you know we planned it
out we had lead on a piece of paper but
it's different than the experience of
seeing 500 people working at Apple
computer it's very different than the
experience of seeing a 5-year-old kid
who uh really understands what he's the
tool that he's got in front of him and
it the the best
analogy I've ever heard is uh Scientific
American I think it was did study in the
early ' 70s on the efficiency of
locomotion and is what they did was for
all different species of things on the
planets birds and cats and dogs and fish
and man and goats and stuff they
measured how much energy does it take
for a goat to get from here to there
right kilo calories per kilometer or
something I don't know what they
measured it in and they ranked them they
published the list and and the Condor
one the Condor took the least amount of
energy to get from here to there and man
was didn't do so well came in with a
rather un impressive showing about a
third of the way down the
list but fortunately someone at
Scientific American was insightful
enough to test man with a bicycle and
man with a bicycle one twice as good as
the Condor all the way off the list and
what it showed was that man as a tool
maker has the ability to make a tool to
amplify an inherent ability that he
has and that's exactly what we're doing
here it's exactly what we're doing here
we're not making bicycles to be ridden
between Palo and San
Francisco okay we're making bicycles and
yes certain bicycles have certain
generic attributes like in general 10
speeds are better to ride in mountains
than one speeds and other things like
that but in general what we're doing is
we're building
tools that amplify a human
ability just like the um you could say
that the Industrial Revolution was
basically an amplification of a human
ability Sweat Right we Amplified sweat
fractional horsepower motors etc etc
what we're working towards now is the
ability to amplify another human
ability and we're just starting to get
glimmerings of where it's going to go as
an
example um how many of you have used
vizac
calcul quite a few of
you at Apple uh every secretary Terry
now has an apple on his or her
desk and they're doing all their word
processing on them you got to give them
credit for that given the software
that's
out and uh they're doing a tremendous
amount of financial modeling on the
thing as an example I I have to keep a
budget for about 40 50 people and uh by
the 10th of every month my secretary's
got all the information from accounting
put it into the visitel model and given
me the ACT ual versus forecast and all
the variances and etc etc and we're
asking what if questions on a daily
basis I I can say her name is Pat I say
Pat what happens if I hire five more
people this month you know what's that
going to do to the budget hour later I
know it's
incredible and what's even more
incredible is when you go talk to these
fifth graders because they're growing up
with this thing you know it's new for
myself I didn't know anything about
stuff 15 years ago 10 years ago but
these kids are growing up with
it um I've
seen some of the kids of people that
work at Apple I've seen go from being
one 2 years old where they push the
return key you know they sit on their
father's lap and mother's lap and what
their part is is to push the return key
to actually know how to program in the
last four years it's
remarkable
so one of the things
that that apple is going to try to do
over the next 3 or 4 years
is to to further that goal and the key
area we're focusing on is the
following right now if you buy a
computer system and you want to solve
one of your problems we immediately
throw a big problem right in the middle
of you and your problem which is
learning how to use the the the
computer right substantial problem to
overcome once you overcome that it's a a
phenomenal tool but there is a barrier
of having to overcome that problem what
we trying to do and I think there's a
reasonable chance that Apple's going to
make a real contribution to solving this
problem in the next 36 months is to
remove that barrier so that someone can
buy a computer system that knows nothing
about it and directly attack their
problem without learning how to program
the
computer
and the reason I think that Apple's got
a chance of solving that problem versus
a lot of other computer companies that
we all know of that are much much larger
than we are now although catching
up uh is that our whole company our
whole philosophical base is founded on
one principle and that one principle is
that there's something very special and
very historically different that takes
place when you have one computer and one
person very different than if you have
10 people in one computer and let's look
at some of the things that that our
industry has or our segment of the
computer industry has contributed to the
computer industry because of that philos
underlying philosophical Concept in
general we were in retail distri
channels 3 four years before the rest of
the computer industry is now waking up
to that fact why because to serve that
one-on-one relationship it was necessary
to to distribute the products that way
it was necessary to have products priced
so that a person one-on-one could afford
the computer system and therefore it was
necessary to distribute them through a
relatively lower cost distribution
Channel rather than direct Salesforce
interactive software uh interactive
video a computer system that can be sold
for a few thousand dos that can actually
do some animation that actually has the
video that's so tightly coupled to the
rest of the computer that you can do
real
time we've got a deck 1170 at Apple
where the terminals communicate with the
1170 at you know 9600 bits per
second that that can't do anything like
visal Kia okay this is $300,000 computer
system and yet my secretary keeps the
budgets on an Apple it's far
superior so and again that comes from
that one-on-one
interaction
and that
perspective is what gives us the feeling
that we have an opportunity to really
contribute to solving that problem and
that's where Apple's
going
now we're very fortunate because the
timing seems to be fallowing falling
into place in other words as we move
into the 80s the amount of of
computational power the amount of raw
horsepower we can get into a small box
for reasonable price is staggering even
in the last 3 years since you know four
years since we started it's it's
increased few orders of
magnitude and one of the things that
people always ask me is uh you know what
what we've got right now is just fine
physic Health runs fast enough you know
some of the data stuff runs fast enough
what are we going to do with this extra
awesome power and the answer to that is
that we're going to put it into
applying into solving that problem
again in other
words we're going to start chewing up
power
specifically to help that one-on-one
interaction go
smoother and specifically not to
actually do the number crunching and the
database management and the word
processing or whatever we're actually
going to start applying a lot of that
power specifically to help us remove
that
barrier and so assuming that we don't
get into World War II and assuming that
we're able to continue to recruit
outstanding
people it looks like the timing is just
right for that to occur so hopefully
when we have our International apple
core meeting you know the third fourth
one from now we'll all be able to to
talk about how we've solved that problem
because I really think it's going to
happen and I really think it's going to
I come out of an industry that 4 years
ago didn't exist that 3 years ago
everyone said was a flash in the F in
the frying pan you know and uh but I
think right now L starting to wake up so
thank you very
[Applause]
much
lot yeah I knew get away with that
answer
you start a
company you have to file what's called a
fictitious business name
statement and what that is the purpose
of that statement which you file with
the government uh is to Simply tell
everyone uh if Apple computer goes or
anything having to do with Apple
computer these are the the corporate
name and as we were government
form and not knowing we thought that was
important so we f
and everyone was names to us like Matrix
Electronics
or all sorts of different names and uh
simply decided that we were going to
call it Apple computer someone suggested
a better Name by 5:00 that
day and part because
uh I like apples a lot and partially I
was a head of Atari in the phone book
and I used to work at
but we re-examined it on a regular basis
and we found that the Jos of
something that seemed to epitomize what
we were going after which was a
Simplicity and yet very refin
sophistication seen our first brochure
probably some of you have it the title
of it was Simplicity is the ultimate
sophistication and that wasn't just a a
 slogan it actually was really
what we've been striving for
and uh the apple scene symbolize that so
I think we're going to stick with
it yeah yeah on the getting back to what
you're talking about about your goals
about eliminating this barrier of this
Obstacle of the computer there you're
talking about all this basically
Hardware power that's available inside
that little box what sort of things are
you're talking about that's going to
translate that Hardware power the power
of the that's inside there into removing
the obos of what's inside there on a
more concrete
level uh well you're asking me to talk
about future
products and I don't want to do that but
I philosophically something
philosophically
um first of all we've done an awful lot
you know when we first started out we
didn't know how to spell the word
software and uh gradually we've learned
we've gone through the standard motions
of setting up an internal application
software Department which proceeded to
fall on its face picking it up and
watching it fall in its face again
finally uh we went through a phase where
we decided that what we were selling was
Solutions not hardware and so we
realized that software was a big part of
the solution and therefore we better get
our software act together matter of fact
now we have more people in software
engineering than Hardware
engineering you know our engineering
Department's over half people are
devoted to Software
and you know a lot of
times we ask ourselves uh what software
is matter of fact notice all these every
other word software that must give you
some clue but what what is software and
I've often thought about this and what
between software and hardware and the
only thing I can think of is that
software is something that either is
changing too rapidly or is
uh you don't exactly know what you want
yet or you didn't have time to get into
Hardware
where the technolog is not there to get
it in harder that's all I can think of
so and and what I see happening is that
more and more software is getting
integrated into Hardware yesterday's
software is today's
Hardware
so those two things are merging I think
and the line between hardware and
software is going to get finer and finer
and finer and finer and one of the ways
that
we're approaching the problem of how to
remove the barrier is try to look ahead
a few years and make
some some predictions as to where the
technology will be both hardware and
software technology and how they're
going to be merged together
and at the same time looking
at very carefully looking at the kinds
of highle tools that our custom
customers are going to need and trying
to to make those two point at the same
Target and I know that's very vague and
I guess I really don't want to talk
about any more than that right now said
a
lot yeah um there are a lot of us that
that have bought Apple Tunes here I'm
sure and that that put a tremendous
amount of money and effort into using
them and planning on using them for many
years to come sure um what does Apple
have in mind for
for continuing support with apple to not
dropping it like some other companies
dropped it this line start out with a
new one and everyone has to go and buy
all the new things or maybe they won
want to or whatever but what you have in
for the people who want to
inter at level with there's three or
four different parts of that answer and
why don't I address each one because I
think it's a really important question
for some crazy reason in the universe uh
two people from Los Altus and Cupertino
California managed to to want something
that just so happened to be what about a
million other people wanted and it's
it's seemed to fit the need fairly well
so well matter of fact that in the last
2 and A2 years nobody else has come
close
so I don't think ABS who's ever going to
be
obsolete to answer it in another angle
the second
angle
um apple is eventually going to have a
broader line of products simply because
let's look at automobile compare a
Volkswagen Rabbit and a dump truck and a
Mercedes-Benz let's say they all have
Transmissions they all have engines four
wheels seats and the basically all
perform the same basic function of
Transportation what's the difference the
difference in
emphasis there's a difference in
emphasis um and I think that that's what
we're going to look at doing is is
potentially broadening the product line
with with computers with a different
emphasis slly different emphasis than an
Apple 2 and
[Applause]
uh I hope you're all pleased with the
the new products that we'll come out
with over the years but I don't think
that many of you are going to actually
feel like giving up your Apple tooth I
don't see that happening one other thing
I heard it comment up here as you were
asking your question somebody said like
apple one right and apple one was an
instance where we did obsolete our
product we absolutely did obsolute the
product and what we
did was uh we decided that we were going
to take care of the people who bought
Apple ones and the people that contacted
us and said listen I'd really like to
have an apple to we worked out an
arrangement that I think everyone was
very happy with so uh we did take care
of those
people and uh I don't think we'll ever
be in a situation like that again of OB
C but you're right you can't afford
it about 500 people people now and apple
will do this year is probably somewhere
between $150 and $200 million worth of
sales and if you actually divide the
sales number by the people you'll find
that we probably have the highest sales
dollars per employee that anybody's
everever heard of and the reason is is
because we've got the most incredible
collection of people on the planet that
I at least the most incredible
collection I've ever seen among of the
other people I've ever seen and working
very very hard and if you actually look
at why they're there why people have
come to Apple why people came originally
it certainly wasn't for the salary a lot
of people came to Apple and took 50%
cuts and salary initially we pay
competitive salaries now but we
certainly don't attract people on the
basis of salary we attract people on the
basis of an opportunity to work your
butt off and get something done right
and see you get out the door without
getting all screwed up and an
opportunity to work with professionals
that are as good as you are in other
disciplines so what Apple what we're
going to make what we're going to judge
our ourselves by the Senior Management
of the company is going to judge Itself
by is can we maintain this
atmosphere of of uh creativity
tremendous productivity a company where
it's just fine to fall in your face as
long as you can pick yourself up pretty
fast and an environment where we give
people enough roope to hang themselves
by and hope that they don't if we can
maintain that for the next 10 years and
Beyond we will have been successful and
the rest of the stuff will take care of
a shop the rest of the stuff take care
of

---

--------------------------------------
ChatGPT:


Here’s the cleaned-up version of your transcript, restructured for clarity and flow:

Good morning, and I must apologize for being late. I was driving here at 90 mph, couldn’t find a parking place, and, well, it’s been one of those mornings.

Recently, we had a photographer from Scientific American who wanted to take some pictures of someone from Apple in an educational setting. We went to a local school in Cupertino, where students were using six Apple computers. It happened to be the day when fourth and fifth graders, part of an advanced learning program, came to use the machines. I had the most delightful conversation with these kids, who were incredibly fluent with the technology. They probably know as much, if not more, about computers than I do, and they even beat me in most of the games.

Seeing these kids interact with the technology was eye-opening. It reminded me of my own school days when none of this existed—we just got into trouble instead.

Last night at 11:30, a friend of mine, Bob, called. He had German visitors who wanted to buy 20-30 Apple computers monthly for some project. It’s incredible to think about how people around the world are finding uses for our products. For instance, a farmer in Nebraska uses an Apple computer to analyze soil samples and determine the right fertilizer to use. These kinds of applications are endless.

When Steve Wozniak ("Woz") and I started Apple, we didn’t plan for any of this. The computer was initially designed for ourselves because we couldn’t afford the kits on the market. We "liberated" parts from Hewlett-Packard and Atari, worked on the design for six months, and eventually built our own computer. Soon, friends wanted one too, so we began helping them assemble the machines. This turned into a time-consuming process, so we decided to sell pre-made printed circuit boards to cut down on assembly time. Woz sold his HP-65 calculator, and I sold my van to fund the project.

Our big break came when Paul Terrell, the owner of the Byte Shop in Mountain View, ordered 50 fully assembled computers. With $10,000 worth of parts purchased on credit, we assembled the machines, sold them, and paid off our distributors—all within 29 days. That’s how Apple started.

People often ask, “Did you know this would become such a phenomenon?” Honestly, we had no idea. We started small, but the experience of seeing a child master the tool or a farmer improve his yield has been far more rewarding than anything we could have planned.

One of the best analogies I’ve heard comes from a Scientific American study about the efficiency of locomotion across species. They found that a condor was the most energy-efficient, while humans ranked poorly. But when a human was tested with a bicycle, we outperformed the condor by a significant margin. That’s what we’re doing with computers—creating tools to amplify human abilities.

At Apple, we’re focused on removing the barriers between people and technology. Right now, using a computer requires learning how to use it, which is a significant obstacle. We’re working to eliminate that barrier so that anyone can directly solve their problems without needing to learn programming or complex systems. I believe Apple is uniquely positioned to tackle this challenge because our philosophy is built around the one-to-one relationship between a person and a computer.

Looking ahead, we see incredible potential in merging hardware and software. The line between the two is blurring, and we’re leveraging advancements in technology to improve the user experience. Our goal is to make computers intuitive, empowering people to focus on their tasks rather than on the tools themselves.

As we grow, we remain committed to supporting our existing users. The Apple II, for instance, continues to serve millions, and we have no intention of making it obsolete. Instead, we’re expanding our product line to cater to different needs, much like the diversity in the automobile industry. We aim to maintain compatibility while introducing new features and capabilities.

At Apple, our success is driven by our people. We attract individuals who are passionate about innovation, willing to work hard, and excited to solve problems creatively. Our company culture values risk-taking, learning from mistakes, and fostering an environment where great ideas can flourish.

As we move forward, I’m confident that we’ll continue to make meaningful contributions to the industry and, more importantly, to the lives of the people who use our products. Thank you.

[Applause]

Let me know if you’d like me to revise or adjust anything further!
--------------------------------------
